vo-manuscript.md, before:

# What do we mean by the directions “cranial” and “caudal” on a vertebra?

Mike Taylor.
Department of Earth Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1RJ, UK.
<dino@miketaylor.org.uk>

Mathew J. Wedel.
College of Osteopathic Medicine of the Pacific and College of Podiatric Medicine, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, California, USA.
<mathew.wedel@gmail.com>


## Contents

<!-- md2toc -l 2 -s 1 vo-manuscript.md -->
* [Introduction](#introduction)
    * [Anatomical nomenclature](#anatomical-nomenclature)
    * [Institutional abbreviations](#institutional-abbreviations)
* [Discussion](#discussion)
    * [Relevance to other work](#relevance-to-other-work)
    * [Open peer review](#open-peer-review)
    * [Open composition](#open-composition)
* [Acknowledgements](#acknowledgements)
* [References](#references)


## Introduction

In late 2017, one of us submitted a paper (Taylor 2018b) redescribing the sauropod dinosaur _Xenoposeidon_ and assigning it to the group Rebbachisauridae, based on the holotype and only specimen NHMUK PV R2095. Among the five diagnostic characters given for _Xenoposeidon_ was #2, “Neural arch slopes anteriorly 30°–35° relative to the vertical” (Taylor 2018b:5). In a helpful and detailed peer review, Phil Mannion (2018a) commented:

> The strong anterior slant of the neural arch appears to be dependent on how you've chosen to orientate the vertebra, but there doesn't appear to be any need to orientate it in this way.

I (Taylor) carelessly failed to directly address this criticism in my response letter, although I did add a brief discussion of the orientation. Consequently Mannion raised the matter again in the second round of review (Mannion 2018b):

> I'm still unconvinced by the proposed anterior slant of the vertebra and don't think that there's any evidence for orientating it in this way. I went into the NHM to re-look at this. No aspect of the posterior articular surface of the centrum leads me to orient the vertebra in the same way of shown in your figures. In addition, as currently orientated, the floor of the neural canal is strongly tilted - it seems more conservative to assume that this is horizontal. Similarly, by following that orientation, this would then make the long-axis of the lateral pneumatic opening closer to horizontal. By orientating the vertebra this way, the anterior margin is sub-vertical, with a very gentle anterior deflection (i.e. fairly normal for a sauropod), and the M-lamina is much closer in orientation to that of _Rebbachisaurus_.

I responded (Taylor 2018a):

> Phil remains convinced that the proper orientation of the vertebra gives is a lesser forward slope that as described in the manuscript. Having once more revisited my photos and 3D models, I remain convinced that the present orientation is essentially correct. It could be out by five degrees or so, so I have changed “35 degrees” to “30-35 degrees” throughout.

Mannion was gracious enough to accept this, and the paper proceeded to publication with the relevant section (Taylor 2018b:5) essentially unchanged. But the question he had raised continued to occupy me: what exactly _is_ the “correct” orientation of the vertebra, relative to which we can measure the angle of the sloping neural arch? And what do we even mean by “correct”? Figure A shows the difference between the slope as published (part A), and as interpreted by Mannion (part B).

---

![Figure A. rotated Xenoposeidon](figures/export-jpeg/Figure-A-rotated-Xenoposeidon.jpeg)

> **Figure A.** NHMUK PV R2095, the holotype dorsal vertebra of _Xenoposiedon proneneukos_ in left lateral view.
> **A.** In the canonical orientation that has been used in illustrations in published papers (Taylor and Naish 2007, Taylor 2018b), in blog-posts and even on mugs (Taylor 2017).
> **B.** Rotated 15° “backwards” (i.e. clockwise, with the dorsal portion displaced caudally), yielding a sub-vertical anterior margin in accordance the recommendation of Mannion (2018b).
> In both parts, the blue line indicates the horizontal axis, the green line indicates the vertical axis, and the red line indicates the slope of the neural arch as in Taylor (2018b: figure 3B, part 2).
> In part A, the slope (i.e. the angle between the red and green lines) is 35°; in part B, it is 20°.

---

The neural arch slopes relative to the vertical. Vertical is defined as being orthogonal to the horizontal. That in turn is defined by the cranial-caudal (= anterior-posterior) axis. But what do those directions mean? How can we define them for a given vertebra?

In the present paper, we aim to answer that question. We will propose and discuss four candidate criteria, recommend the one we consider most practical and informative, and determine the slope of _Xenoposeidon_'s neural arch more precisely.

Note that the present question is nothing to do with life posture, which is a much more difficult problem, subject to many more degrees of uncertainty. Animals do not hold their vertebral columns any anything close to true horizontal — not even though that we characterise as having horizontal posture — and we do not want to tie the meaning of our very nomenclature to something so variable and unpredictable. Otherwise we would have to define “horizontal” for the mid-cervical vertebrae of parrots as upside-down (Figure B).

---

![Figure B. Parrot with 'S'-curved neck](figures/export-jpeg/Figure-B-hemisected-parrot.jpeg)

> **Figure B.** Parrot skeleton with hemisected integument (probably _Amazona ochrocephala_) in left lateral view, in the Natuurhistorisch Museum of Rotterdam. Photograph by Marc Vincent, used with permission. Note the very strong 'S'-curve of the neck, such that the most caudal cervical vertebrae are inclined downwards, then more cranial vertebrae are, progressively, inclined upwards, near vertical, sloping _backwards_, then vertical again, and finally sloping upwards to the skull.

---

### Anatomical nomenclature

As dinosaur palaeontologists, we generally use and prefer the Owenian system of anatomical directions, with anterior and posterior indicating the forward and backward directions accordingly (Owen 1854) — hence the use of these terms in the _Xenoposeidon_ paper, its reviews, and the associated discussion. However, for the present paper, we seek directional definitions that are unambiguous for all vertebrates: not only those like dinosaurs, dogs and fish, which hold their vertebral columns essentially horizontal; but also those like humans, penguins and meerkats, which hold their vertebral columns essentially vertical. For this reason, avoiding ambiguity in humans, where “anterior” means ventral (towards the belly) rather than cranial (towards the head), we will use terms cranial and caudal, and derived terms such as craniodorsal.

### Institutional abbreviations

* **NHMUK PV** — Natural History Museum, London, UK; vertebrate palaeontology collection.


## Discussion

### Relevance to other work

XXX

### Open peer review

In publishing the _Xenoposeidon_ revision (Taylor 2018b) in the journal _PeerJ-, I (Taylor) was pleased to take advantage of the journal's policy of allowing submitted drafts, peer-reviews, response letters and handling editors' comments to be published alongside the final paper. It is because these materials are published (### Young et al. 2018) that the sequence of discussion is preserved, and Mannion's helpful and gracious comments are available to be read — not only as the extracts in the present paper, but in their full context.

We endorse the publication of peer reviews, and both take this option whenever it is offered. Aside from their value as part of the scholarly record, published peer-reviews are visible evidence of the reviewers’ broader contribution to science, and can be taken into account in evaluating researchers for jobs, promotions, tenure and grants. Sets of reviews, accompanied by the corresponding versions of the manuscript, can be an important pedagogical tool for teaching students in practical terms how peer-review works (e.g. XXX pers. comm.). Crucially, reviews can play an important role in the origination of new research questions, and should be acknowledged: the present work on defining vertebral orientation arises directly from Phil Mannion's peer-review comments (Mannion 2018a, 2018b).

### Open composition

This work first began to take shape as a series of blog-posts (Taylor 2018c, Taylor 2018d, Wedel 2018a, Wedel 2018b, Wedel 2018c) which were drawn together in a talk (Taylor and Wedel 2018) presented by Taylor as part of the 1st Palaeontological Virtual Congress (http://palaeovc.uv.es/) and announced online (Wedel 2018d). This manuscript was developed in the open, in a public GitHub repository (https://github.com/MikeTaylor/palaeo-vo; see Taylor 2018e). We commend this approach as valuable for soliciting informal feedback early in the process, and in making the research itself available quickly.


## Acknowledgements

First, we thank Phil Mannion (Imperial College London) both for his multiple rounds of review of the _Xenoposeidon_ manuscript and for giving us permission to quote relevant excepts in the current paper. We also thank Marc Vincent for permission to reproduce his photograph in Figure B.

We are deeply grateful to the curators and collection managers for access to specimens used in this study, including
* Daniela Schwarz (Museum für Naturukunde Berlin) for _Giraffatitan_.
* Julia McHugh (Dinosaur Journey) for _Haplocanthosaurus_.
* Bill Simpson (Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago, IL) for _Brachiosaurus_ and the giraffe.
* Neftali Camacho (Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History) for the Komodo dragon.
* Sandra Chapman (Natural History Museum, London, UK) for _Xenoposeidon_.
* Ken Noriega (Western University of Health Sciences) for the horse head.

Finally, we thank John Yasmer and Thierra Nalley (Western University of Health Sciences) for their assistance in CT scanning and 3D modelling the _Haplocanthosaurus_ caudal vertebra.


## References

* Mannion, Philip D. 2018a. Peer Review #3 (1st round) of "_Xenoposeidon_ is the earliest known rebbachisaurid sauropod dinosaur (v0.1)". PeerJ. doi:10.7287/peerj.5212v0.1/reviews/3
* Mannion, Philip D. 2018b. Peer Review #3 (2nd round) of "_Xenoposeidon_ is the earliest known rebbachisaurid sauropod dinosaur (v0.2)". PeerJ. doi:10.7287/peerj.5212v0.2/reviews/3
* Owen, Richard. 1854. The principal forms of the skeleton and of the teeth. Blanchard and Lea, Philadelphia.
* Taylor, Michael P. 2017. My collection of sauropod-themed mugs (or at least five sixths of it). _Sauropod Vertebra Picture of the Week_ 4 June 2017. https://svpow.com/2017/06/04/my-collection-of-sauropod-themed-mugs-or-at-least-five-sixths-of-it/
* Taylor, Michael P. 2018a. Untitled rebuttal letter to 2nd round of reviews. https://peerj.com/articles/5212v0.3/rebuttal
* Taylor, Michael P. 2018b. _Xenoposeidon_ is the earliest known rebbachisaurid sauropod dinosaur. _PeerJ_ **6**:e5212. doi:10.7717/peerj.5212
* Taylor, Michael P. 2018c. What does it mean for a vertebra to be “horizontal”? _Sauropod Vertebra Picture of the Week_ 28 August 2018. https://svpow.com/2018/08/28/what-does-it-mean-for-a-vertebra-to-be-horizontal/
* Taylor, Michael P. 2018d. When is a vertebra “horizontal”, part 2. _Sauropod Vertebra Picture of the Week_ 28 August 2018. https://svpow.com/2018/08/28/when-is-a-vertebra-horizontal-part-2/
* Taylor, Michael P. 2018e. Writing the vertebral-orientation paper in the open. _Sauropod Vertebra Picture of the Week_ 14 December 2018. https://svpow.com/2018/12/14/writing-the-vertebral-orientation-paper-in-the-open/
* Taylor Michael P., and Mathew J. Wedel. 2018. What do we mean by the directions “cranial” and “caudal” on a vertebra? _PeerJ Preprints_ **6**:e27437v1. doi:10.7287/peerj.preprints.27437v1
* Wedel, Matthew J. 2018a. The proximal caudals of _Brachiosaurus altithorax_, FMNH P25107. _Sauropod Vertebra Picture of the Week_ 11 September 2018. https://svpow.com/2018/09/11/the-proximal-caudals-of-brachiosaurus-altithorax-fmnh-p25107/
* Wedel, Matthew J. 2018b. Vertebral orientation: _Varanus komodoensis_ would like a word. _Sauropod Vertebra Picture of the Week_ 25 September 2018. https://svpow.com/2018/09/25/vertebral-orientation-varanus-komodoensis-would-like-a-word/
* Wedel, Matthew J. 2018c. Vertebral orientation, part 3: Matt weighs in. _Sauropod Vertebra Picture of the Week_ 5 October 2018. https://svpow.com/2018/10/05/vertebral-orientation-part-3-matt-weighs-in/
* Wedel, Matthew J. 2018d. Our presentations are up at the 1st Palaeo Virtual Congress. _Sauropod Vertebra Picture of the Week_ 5 December 2018. https://svpow.com/2018/12/05/our-presentations-are-up-at-the-1st-palaeo-virtual-congress/

Commit message:

Farke on teaching from peer-reviews

vo-manuscript.md, after:

# What do we mean by the directions “cranial” and “caudal” on a vertebra?

Mike Taylor.
Department of Earth Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1RJ, UK.
<dino@miketaylor.org.uk>

Mathew J. Wedel.
College of Osteopathic Medicine of the Pacific and College of Podiatric Medicine, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, California, USA.
<mathew.wedel@gmail.com>


## Contents

<!-- md2toc -l 2 -s 1 vo-manuscript.md -->
* [Introduction](#introduction)
    * [Anatomical nomenclature](#anatomical-nomenclature)
    * [Institutional abbreviations](#institutional-abbreviations)
* [Discussion](#discussion)
    * [Relevance to other work](#relevance-to-other-work)
    * [Open peer review](#open-peer-review)
    * [Open composition](#open-composition)
* [Acknowledgements](#acknowledgements)
* [References](#references)


## Introduction

In late 2017, one of us submitted a paper (Taylor 2018b) redescribing the sauropod dinosaur _Xenoposeidon_ and assigning it to the group Rebbachisauridae, based on the holotype and only specimen NHMUK PV R2095. Among the five diagnostic characters given for _Xenoposeidon_ was #2, “Neural arch slopes anteriorly 30°–35° relative to the vertical” (Taylor 2018b:5). In a helpful and detailed peer review, Phil Mannion (2018a) commented:

> The strong anterior slant of the neural arch appears to be dependent on how you've chosen to orientate the vertebra, but there doesn't appear to be any need to orientate it in this way.

I (Taylor) carelessly failed to directly address this criticism in my response letter, although I did add a brief discussion of the orientation. Consequently Mannion raised the matter again in the second round of review (Mannion 2018b):

> I'm still unconvinced by the proposed anterior slant of the vertebra and don't think that there's any evidence for orientating it in this way. I went into the NHM to re-look at this. No aspect of the posterior articular surface of the centrum leads me to orient the vertebra in the same way of shown in your figures. In addition, as currently orientated, the floor of the neural canal is strongly tilted - it seems more conservative to assume that this is horizontal. Similarly, by following that orientation, this would then make the long-axis of the lateral pneumatic opening closer to horizontal. By orientating the vertebra this way, the anterior margin is sub-vertical, with a very gentle anterior deflection (i.e. fairly normal for a sauropod), and the M-lamina is much closer in orientation to that of _Rebbachisaurus_.

I responded (Taylor 2018a):

> Phil remains convinced that the proper orientation of the vertebra gives is a lesser forward slope that as described in the manuscript. Having once more revisited my photos and 3D models, I remain convinced that the present orientation is essentially correct. It could be out by five degrees or so, so I have changed “35 degrees” to “30-35 degrees” throughout.

Mannion was gracious enough to accept this, and the paper proceeded to publication with the relevant section (Taylor 2018b:5) essentially unchanged. But the question he had raised continued to occupy me: what exactly _is_ the “correct” orientation of the vertebra, relative to which we can measure the angle of the sloping neural arch? And what do we even mean by “correct”? Figure A shows the difference between the slope as published (part A), and as interpreted by Mannion (part B).

---

![Figure A. rotated Xenoposeidon](figures/export-jpeg/Figure-A-rotated-Xenoposeidon.jpeg)

> **Figure A.** NHMUK PV R2095, the holotype dorsal vertebra of _Xenoposiedon proneneukos_ in left lateral view.
> **A.** In the canonical orientation that has been used in illustrations in published papers (Taylor and Naish 2007, Taylor 2018b), in blog-posts and even on mugs (Taylor 2017).
> **B.** Rotated 15° “backwards” (i.e. clockwise, with the dorsal portion displaced caudally), yielding a sub-vertical anterior margin in accordance the recommendation of Mannion (2018b).
> In both parts, the blue line indicates the horizontal axis, the green line indicates the vertical axis, and the red line indicates the slope of the neural arch as in Taylor (2018b: figure 3B, part 2).
> In part A, the slope (i.e. the angle between the red and green lines) is 35°; in part B, it is 20°.

---

The neural arch slopes relative to the vertical. Vertical is defined as being orthogonal to the horizontal. That in turn is defined by the cranial-caudal (= anterior-posterior) axis. But what do those directions mean? How can we define them for a given vertebra?

In the present paper, we aim to answer that question. We will propose and discuss four candidate criteria, recommend the one we consider most practical and informative, and determine the slope of _Xenoposeidon_'s neural arch more precisely.

Note that the present question is nothing to do with life posture, which is a much more difficult problem, subject to many more degrees of uncertainty. Animals do not hold their vertebral columns any anything close to true horizontal — not even though that we characterise as having horizontal posture — and we do not want to tie the meaning of our very nomenclature to something so variable and unpredictable. Otherwise we would have to define “horizontal” for the mid-cervical vertebrae of parrots as upside-down (Figure B).

---

![Figure B. Parrot with 'S'-curved neck](figures/export-jpeg/Figure-B-hemisected-parrot.jpeg)

> **Figure B.** Parrot skeleton with hemisected integument (probably _Amazona ochrocephala_) in left lateral view, in the Natuurhistorisch Museum of Rotterdam. Photograph by Marc Vincent, used with permission. Note the very strong 'S'-curve of the neck, such that the most caudal cervical vertebrae are inclined downwards, then more cranial vertebrae are, progressively, inclined upwards, near vertical, sloping _backwards_, then vertical again, and finally sloping upwards to the skull.

---

### Anatomical nomenclature

As dinosaur palaeontologists, we generally use and prefer the Owenian system of anatomical directions, with anterior and posterior indicating the forward and backward directions accordingly (Owen 1854) — hence the use of these terms in the _Xenoposeidon_ paper, its reviews, and the associated discussion. However, for the present paper, we seek directional definitions that are unambiguous for all vertebrates: not only those like dinosaurs, dogs and fish, which hold their vertebral columns essentially horizontal; but also those like humans, penguins and meerkats, which hold their vertebral columns essentially vertical. For this reason, avoiding ambiguity in humans, where “anterior” means ventral (towards the belly) rather than cranial (towards the head), we will use terms cranial and caudal, and derived terms such as craniodorsal.

### Institutional abbreviations

* **NHMUK PV** — Natural History Museum, London, UK; vertebrate palaeontology collection.


## Discussion

### Relevance to other work

XXX

### Open peer review

In publishing the _Xenoposeidon_ revision (Taylor 2018b) in the journal _PeerJ-, I (Taylor) was pleased to take advantage of the journal's policy of allowing submitted drafts, peer-reviews, response letters and handling editors' comments to be published alongside the final paper. It is because these materials are published (### Young et al. 2018) that the sequence of discussion is preserved, and Mannion's helpful and gracious comments are available to be read — not only as the extracts in the present paper, but in their full context.

We endorse the publication of peer reviews, and both take this option whenever it is offered. Aside from their value as part of the scholarly record, published peer-reviews are visible evidence of the reviewers’ broader contribution to science, and can be taken into account in evaluating researchers for jobs, promotions, tenure and grants. Sets of reviews, accompanied by the corresponding versions of the manuscript, can be an important pedagogical tool for teaching students in practical terms how peer-review works: for example, Andy Farke (Raymond M. Alf Museum) writes “I use those published reviews when we are talking about the process of scientific publication. I have the students read the reviews and read the responses, and then talk about how the paper changed as a result” (pers. comm. 2018). Crucially, reviews can play an important role in the origination of new research questions, and should be acknowledged: the present work on defining vertebral orientation arises directly from Phil Mannion's peer-review comments (Mannion 2018a, 2018b).

### Open composition

This work first began to take shape as a series of blog-posts (Taylor 2018c, Taylor 2018d, Wedel 2018a, Wedel 2018b, Wedel 2018c) which were drawn together in a talk (Taylor and Wedel 2018) presented by Taylor as part of the 1st Palaeontological Virtual Congress (http://palaeovc.uv.es/) and announced online (Wedel 2018d). This manuscript was developed in the open, in a public GitHub repository (https://github.com/MikeTaylor/palaeo-vo; see Taylor 2018e). We commend this approach as valuable for soliciting informal feedback early in the process, and in making the research itself available quickly.


## Acknowledgements

First, we thank Phil Mannion (Imperial College London) both for his multiple rounds of review of the _Xenoposeidon_ manuscript and for giving us permission to quote relevant excepts in the current paper. We also thank Marc Vincent for permission to reproduce his photograph in Figure B and Andy Farke for permission to cite a personal communication.

We are deeply grateful to the curators and collection managers for access to specimens used in this study, including
* Daniela Schwarz (Museum für Naturukunde Berlin) for _Giraffatitan_.
* Julia McHugh (Dinosaur Journey) for _Haplocanthosaurus_.
* Bill Simpson (Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago, IL) for _Brachiosaurus_ and the giraffe.
* Neftali Camacho (Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History) for the Komodo dragon.
* Sandra Chapman (Natural History Museum, London, UK) for _Xenoposeidon_.
* Ken Noriega (Western University of Health Sciences) for the horse head.

Finally, we thank John Yasmer and Thierra Nalley (Western University of Health Sciences) for their assistance in CT scanning and 3D modelling the _Haplocanthosaurus_ caudal vertebra.


## References

* Mannion, Philip D. 2018a. Peer Review #3 (1st round) of "_Xenoposeidon_ is the earliest known rebbachisaurid sauropod dinosaur (v0.1)". PeerJ. doi:10.7287/peerj.5212v0.1/reviews/3
* Mannion, Philip D. 2018b. Peer Review #3 (2nd round) of "_Xenoposeidon_ is the earliest known rebbachisaurid sauropod dinosaur (v0.2)". PeerJ. doi:10.7287/peerj.5212v0.2/reviews/3
* Owen, Richard. 1854. The principal forms of the skeleton and of the teeth. Blanchard and Lea, Philadelphia.
* Taylor, Michael P. 2017. My collection of sauropod-themed mugs (or at least five sixths of it). _Sauropod Vertebra Picture of the Week_ 4 June 2017. https://svpow.com/2017/06/04/my-collection-of-sauropod-themed-mugs-or-at-least-five-sixths-of-it/
* Taylor, Michael P. 2018a. Untitled rebuttal letter to 2nd round of reviews. https://peerj.com/articles/5212v0.3/rebuttal
* Taylor, Michael P. 2018b. _Xenoposeidon_ is the earliest known rebbachisaurid sauropod dinosaur. _PeerJ_ **6**:e5212. doi:10.7717/peerj.5212
* Taylor, Michael P. 2018c. What does it mean for a vertebra to be “horizontal”? _Sauropod Vertebra Picture of the Week_ 28 August 2018. https://svpow.com/2018/08/28/what-does-it-mean-for-a-vertebra-to-be-horizontal/
* Taylor, Michael P. 2018d. When is a vertebra “horizontal”, part 2. _Sauropod Vertebra Picture of the Week_ 28 August 2018. https://svpow.com/2018/08/28/when-is-a-vertebra-horizontal-part-2/
* Taylor, Michael P. 2018e. Writing the vertebral-orientation paper in the open. _Sauropod Vertebra Picture of the Week_ 14 December 2018. https://svpow.com/2018/12/14/writing-the-vertebral-orientation-paper-in-the-open/
* Taylor Michael P., and Mathew J. Wedel. 2018. What do we mean by the directions “cranial” and “caudal” on a vertebra? _PeerJ Preprints_ **6**:e27437v1. doi:10.7287/peerj.preprints.27437v1
* Wedel, Matthew J. 2018a. The proximal caudals of _Brachiosaurus altithorax_, FMNH P25107. _Sauropod Vertebra Picture of the Week_ 11 September 2018. https://svpow.com/2018/09/11/the-proximal-caudals-of-brachiosaurus-altithorax-fmnh-p25107/
* Wedel, Matthew J. 2018b. Vertebral orientation: _Varanus komodoensis_ would like a word. _Sauropod Vertebra Picture of the Week_ 25 September 2018. https://svpow.com/2018/09/25/vertebral-orientation-varanus-komodoensis-would-like-a-word/
* Wedel, Matthew J. 2018c. Vertebral orientation, part 3: Matt weighs in. _Sauropod Vertebra Picture of the Week_ 5 October 2018. https://svpow.com/2018/10/05/vertebral-orientation-part-3-matt-weighs-in/
* Wedel, Matthew J. 2018d. Our presentations are up at the 1st Palaeo Virtual Congress. _Sauropod Vertebra Picture of the Week_ 5 December 2018. https://svpow.com/2018/12/05/our-presentations-are-up-at-the-1st-palaeo-virtual-congress/
